\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ssm.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@include version.texi
@settitle SSM Library @value{VERSION}
@c %**end of header

@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@afourpaper
@setchapternewpage odd
@firstparagraphindent insert

@c Header for a function, macro or type.
@macro ssmdef{name}
@unnumberedsubsec @point{} @strong{@t{\name\}}
@findex @t{\name\}
@end macro

@c Typical usage:
@c 
@c @ssmdef FUNCTION-NAME
@c FUNCTION-SHORT-DESCRIPTION
@c 
@c @cartouche
@c @example
@c FUNCTION-DECLARATION
@c @end example
@c @end cartouche
@c 
@c @multitable @columnfractions .15 .10 .75
@c @headitem Parameter @tab Mode @tab Description
@c @item @var{PARAM-NAME} @tab in,out @tab PARAM-DESCRIPTION
@c ....
@c @item @tab return @tab RETURN-DESCRIPTION
@c @end multitable
@c 
@c FUNCTION-FULL-DESCRIPTION

@c Copyright information, will be inserted at @insertcopying.
@copying
This manual is for SSM (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
a Safe Strings and Memory buffers library for C.

Copyright @copyright{} 2014 Thierry Lel@'egard

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c For 'info' documentation set.
@dircategory Software libraries
@direntry
* SSM: (ssm). Safe Strings and Memory buffers library for C.
@end direntry

@c Title page.
@titlepage
@title SSM (Safe Strings and Memory)
@subtitle Library of Safe Strings and Memory buffers for the C language
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Thierry Lel@'egard
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Content page.
@contents

@c Main structure for the 'info' command
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top SSM, a library of Safe Strings and Memory buffers for the C language
@end ifnottex

@c Use 'C-c C-u m' to update the main menu in Emacs.
@c Use 'C-c C-u C-m' to update a menu within a section in Emacs.

@menu
* Overview::
* Common mechanisms::
* Static strings::
* Dynamic strings::
* Static memory buffers::
* Dynamic memory buffers::
* Low-level mechanisms::
* Index::

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview

* The classical C strings library::
* The SSM library::
* SSM objects::
* Using the SSM library::
* Thread-safety::
* Dynamic memory allocation::
* Using "canary" runtime checks::
* Supported platforms::
* Code footprint::
* License::

Common mechanisms

* SSM library identification::
* Error reporting::
* Addresses and sizes::
* Dynamic memory management::

Low-level mechanisms

* Memory corruption detection::
* Manipulating raw memory::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@include ssm_overview.texi
@include ssm_common.texi
@include ssm_sstring.texi
@include ssm_dstring.texi
@include ssm_sbuffer.texi
@include ssm_dbuffer.texi
@include ssm_lowlevel.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp
@bye
